expand connection close (#57)
kazuho/draft-kazuho-quic-quic-services-for-streams: draft-ietf-quic-qmux.md

datagrams when they cannot be promptly delivered to the application.

# Connection Termination

A QMux connection can be terminated by a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame, by an idle
timeout, or by termination of the underlying transport.

## Immediate Close

As in QUIC version 1, an endpoint closes the QMux connection by sending a
CONNECTION_CLOSE frame. Unlike QUIC version 1, there is no draining period; once
an endpoint sends or receives the CONNECTION_CLOSE frame, all resources
allocated for the connection are freed and the underlying transport is closed

> immediately.

Reviewer: I don't think this works very well.  The sending side can send and free its connection, but we know how reliable the delivery of that is going to be in TCP: not very.  I think that you need to take QUICs rules on CONNECTION_CLOSE more closely and ask the recipient to send CONNECTION_CLOSE back.

Author: Yeah, IIUC QUIC neither provides the guarantee that data was delivered to the receiving application. ACKs do not provide such a guarantee, and CONNECTION_CLOSE is nothing more than an immediate reset in terms of data transmission in both directions.

That said, I think your point stands in sense that the risk of losing data is much higher with QMux, especially when an application tries to close the connection as soon as data transfer is complete. In QUIC, the sender would at least wait for ACKs for all data being sent. But QMux does not have ACKs; in fact, its stream state machinery assumes that sent data are acked the moment they are written to the transport. TCP ACKs can neither be relied upon, as connections might be split by middleboxes. Separately, TCP resets discard data in the kernel receive buffer.

Considering that QUIC does not provide delivery guarantee with CONNECTION_CLOSE, I think what we want to RECOMMEND in QMux is that, after sending CONNECTION_CLOSE, an endpoint perform a graceful shutdown of the underlying transport; i.e., close the write side and continue reading from the peer until the peer closes. This narrows QMux's exposure without inventing a new mechanism that QUIC itself does not have. WDYT?

Reviewer 2: This is quite a big PR and is generating a decent amount of discussion. Feels like we should have an issue to at least capture the summary of the problems that we appear to be aligning on.

Reviewer 2: By graceful close, do you mean waiting for some time period before blowing away local state? If so, how proscriptive should that be (partly related to https://github.com/quicwg/qmux/issues/59). In practice, I suspect the graceful close time of this interaction would want to be in the order of RTTs (contrasted with, say, H3 GOAWAY which could be minutes to hours)

Reviewer: I would say that something that mirrors QUIC's handling of CONNECTION_CLOSE would be ideal.  That is, the three PTO hold-down, etc...

Reviewer 2: My original comment did mention QUIC's PTO but then I realised that such information might not be available to QMux. The transport layer RTT might not even be, although a QMUx RTT (as measured by QX_PING) could be used as a substitute if needed.

Author: With commits up to a747b24, I've adjusted the design to one proposed in https://github.com/quicwg/qmux/issues/59#issuecomment-4311595330.

PTAL; I think the changes address the points raised here.

## Idle Timeout

As in QUIC version 1, endpoints can negotiate an idle timeout using the
max_idle_timeout transport parameter.

Endpoints reset the idle timer when sending or receiving a QMux record. Activity
on the underlying transport, such as TCP keepalives, does not reset the idle
timer. Unlike QUIC version 1, idle timeout handling does not rely on
acknowledgments.

When no other traffic is available, QX_PING frames can be used to elicit a peer
response and keep both the QMux connection and the underlying transport active.

When an endpoint reaches the idle timeout, the connection is closed and the

> underlying transport is closed immediately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When an endpoint reaches the idle timeout, they can immediately
close the underlying transport
or abandon it without transmitting any signal
at their discretion.
```

datagrams when they cannot be promptly delivered to the application.

# Connection Termination

A QMux connection can be terminated by a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame, by an idle
timeout, or by termination of the underlying transport.

## Immediate Close

As in QUIC version 1, an endpoint closes the QMux connection by sending a
CONNECTION_CLOSE frame. Unlike QUIC version 1, there is no draining period; once
an endpoint sends or receives the CONNECTION_CLOSE frame, all resources
allocated for the connection are freed and the underlying transport is closed
immediately.

## Idle Timeout

As in QUIC version 1, endpoints can negotiate an idle timeout using the
max_idle_timeout transport parameter.

> Endpoints reset the idle timer when sending or receiving a QMux record. Activity

Reviewer 3: Resetting the idle timer when sending is a bit risky.  For TCP, it's possible to have a connection blackholed, so you don't get a RST, and this could cause you do keep the connection alive indefinitely.

Reviewer: Yeah, QUIC only refreshes the idle timer on receive.  For exactly that reason.  I recommend doing the same.  (You'll pick up a theme here: QUIC got a lot of these fiddly design parts right and you should stick to those decisions as closely as you are able.)

Reviewer 2: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9000#section-10.1-3 doesn't agree

> An endpoint restarts its idle timer when a packet from its peer is received and processed successfully. An endpoint also restarts its idle timer when sending an ack-eliciting packet if no other ack-eliciting packets have been sent since last receiving and processing a packet.

Reviewer: Ugh, clearly my memory of the details is starting to fade.  I should have checked.  The reason for the refresh on send is a good one: you expect that any send would maybe activate the timer.  Because you probably want to keep using the connection.  But this triggers just once!  As a result, that doesn't activate the problem that Ian identified.  Consider matching the QUIC rules.

Author: @ianswett 
> Resetting the idle timer when sending is a bit risky. For TCP, it's possible to have a connection blackholed, so you don't get a RST, and this could cause you do keep the connection alive indefinitely.

I'm not sure.

When the connection is blackholed, underlying transport never receives its ACKs. Therefore, it sooner or later becomes impossible for the QMux endpoint to send more frames, as the send buffer becomes full. After that, the send buffer remains full, and the idle timer eventually expires.

I think this approach is better than resetting the idle timer only when receiving a record, because that'd require endpoints to periodically send frames just for resetting the peer's idle timer.

Reviewer 2: I think what MT is suggesting is we only reset the idle timer on send *once* after receiving a record. That way, if a connection is blackholed we dont end up doing infinite timer reset on every sent record.

The slight difference for qmux is that a record isn't generally "ack eliciting", so receiving records is not guaranteed. You could mitigate that by including a QX_PING

Author: > we only reset the idle timer on send once after receiving a record. 

Thanks; addressed in b2cf66d.

# Connection Termination

A QMux connection can be terminated by a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame, by an idle
timeout, or by termination of the underlying transport.

## Immediate Close

As in QUIC version 1, an endpoint closes the QMux connection by sending a
CONNECTION_CLOSE frame. Unlike QUIC version 1, there is no draining period; once
an endpoint sends or receives the CONNECTION_CLOSE frame, all resources
allocated for the connection are freed and the underlying transport is closed
immediately.

## Idle Timeout

As in QUIC version 1, endpoints can negotiate an idle timeout using the
max_idle_timeout transport parameter.

Endpoints reset the idle timer when sending or receiving a QMux record. Activity
on the underlying transport, such as TCP keepalives, does not reset the idle
timer. Unlike QUIC version 1, idle timeout handling does not rely on
acknowledgments.

When no other traffic is available, QX_PING frames can be used to elicit a peer
response and keep both the QMux connection and the underlying transport active.

When an endpoint reaches the idle timeout, they can immediately
close the underlying transport
or abandon it without transmitting any signal

> at their discretion.

Reviewer 2: Its not clear to me what level of signal are we talking? Do you mean once the idle timeout expires there's no need for CONNECTION_CLOSE, or that there's no need to send a signal in the underlying transport (something that might be hard to do in practice)

Author: With 4397a35, this point should be clear now (no CONNECTION_CLOSE upon idle timeout).

datagrams when they cannot be promptly delivered to the application.

# Connection Termination

A QMux connection can be terminated by an idle timeout, by a CONNECTION_CLOSE
frame, or by observing a reset of the underlying transport.

## Idle Timeout

As in QUIC version 1, endpoints negotiate an idle timeout using the
max_idle_timeout transport parameter.

Endpoints reset the idle timer each time a QMux record is either completely sent

> or completely received. Activity on the underlying transport, such as TCP

Reviewer: This differs from QUIC in ways that I think you will regret.

The model in QUIC is that incoming packets unconditionally reset the timer, but only the first send after a packet is received does the same.  This ensures that an endpoint that is attempting to contact an unresponsive peer will time out.

Author: I don't think we can adopt QUIC version 1's rule as-is, because it relies on a signal QMux doesn't have.

Consider an endpoint sending over a a large flow-control window, or an endpoint sending only DATAGRAM frames. The peer will only ACK at the transport layer; it sends no ack-eliciting frames back. In QUIC, those ACKs are visible to the protocol stack and reset the idle timer, so the connection stays alive. In QMux the ACKs are consumed by the underlying transport and are invisible. The closest signal QMux has is the opportunity to completely send another record, which only arises because earlier data was ACKed and drained from the send buffer. That's why this PR resets the idle timer each time a record is completely sent: it tracks the same ACK-driven liveness QUIC's timer does, just observed indirectly.

As for timing out an unresponsive peer (no ACKs, no frames received): the rule as written already handles it. Nothing resets the timer unless a record is completely sent or completely received. Against an unresponsive peer, the endpoint receives nothing, and on the send side it either has nothing to send, or cannot write any more because the peer is no longer draining; so in every case the timer goes unreset and expires.

Reviewer: This is very reasonable and I agree that it doesn't make sense for what is essentially a unidirectional flow to die, which is what would happen if QUIC's design were taken so directly.

It's probably worth explaining this detail and some of the thinking.  Otherwise, the differences between the protocols will end up surprising people.  This is definitely a case where the abstraction will end up leaking, which is unavoidable, so extra help is a good idea.

Author: Makes perfect sense. Done in [334ee01](https://github.com/quicwg/qmux/pull/57/commits/334ee0107b217b01f9d4e89818c5f249e808c32c); PTAL.

keepalives, does not reset the idle timer. Unlike QUIC version 1, idle timeout

> handling does not rely on acknowledgments; QMux endpoints do not increase their

Reviewer: I don't think that this is quite accurate.  QUIC's idle timeout simply doesn't care about the content of packets.

Author: Thanks, the intent was to state that PTO, which is a value that reflects how ACK are received, is not taken into consideration. But I agree that it's confusing. Dropped the rationale in e0f995a.

connection and the underlying transport active.

## Initiating a Connection Close

When the idle timeout expires, an endpoint gracefully shuts down its sending
side of the underlying transport, without sending any frames.

Separately, as in QUIC version 1, an endpoint can initiate closing of a QMux
connection by sending a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame and then gracefully shuts down
its sending side of the underlying transport.

In either case, once shutting down the sending side, the endpoint SHOULD wait
for the peer to gracefully shut down the peer's sending side. The use of
graceful shutdown mitigates the risk of undelivered records and frames
becoming lost due to abrupt termination of the underlying transport. While
waiting for the peer to gracefully shut down, QMux endpoints SHOULD discard any
data they receive without processing it, similarly to QUIC version 1 endpoints
discarding packets received during the draining period
({{Section 10.2.2 of QUIC}}).

## Responding to a Connection Close

When receiving a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame or observing the peer shut down the
peer's sending side, the receiving endpoint SHOULD gracefully shut down its

> sending side, without sending any frames.

Reviewer: QUIC specifically allows the recipient of CONNECTION_CLOSE to send exactly one CONNECTION_CLOSE in response.  It seems like, with a reliable substrate, you could allow the same here.  It would allow for a positive indication that a clean end was agreed to.  And you don't have to worry here about the acknowledgement machinery keeping the connection alive indefinitely during shutdown.

Author: Makes perfect sense. Adopted in ec30e14.

datagrams when they cannot be promptly delivered to the application.

# Connection Termination

A QMux connection can be terminated by an idle timeout, by a CONNECTION_CLOSE

> frame, or by observing a reset of the underlying transport.

Reviewer 4: Nit: just in case anyone thinks it's only "reset" specifically
```suggestion
frame, or by observing a closure of the underlying transport.
```

## Idle Timeout

In QUIC version 1, the idle timer is reset whenever a packet is received and
processed successfully, including acknowledgment-only packets. It also raises
the idle timeout using PTO, a value derived from when acknowledgments are
received. QMux cannot adopt this approach as-is since acknowledgments are not
processed by QMux stacks; they are processed by the underlying transport
instead.

As a consequence, the idle timeout of QMux is defined as follows:

* As in QUIC version 1, endpoints negotiate an idle timeout using the
  max_idle_timeout transport parameter.
* As in QUIC version 1, endpoints reset the idle timer each time a QMux record
  is completely received.
* Endpoints also reset the idle timer each time a QMux record is completely
  sent. Since acknowledgments are not directly visible to QMux endpoints, QMux
  does not reset the idle timer on acknowledgements. Instead, endpoints observe
  the side effect of acknowledgments: bytes drained from the send buffer,

>   opening up space to send more.

Reviewer 4: Non-blocking: Is this creating a tighter coupling between layers than is easy for folks to implement?

Author: I think this is fine. I'd assume that, while some transports might not use acknowledgments at all, they will have back pressure from the receiver. And therefore that the new design is correct to depend on that back pressure.

Put differently, we could improve the text further, but I think we can land this PR now.

* Activity on the underlying transport - such as acknowledgments, TCP keepalives, or TLS key updates - does not reset
  the idle timer.
* QMux endpoints do not increase their idle timeouts relative to the current
  Probe Timeout (PTO).

While idle, a QMux connection may also be torn down by timers outside of QMux;

> e.g., Network Address Translation {{?RFC7857}}. QX_PING frames can be used to

Reviewer 4: Nit: Technically it's not torn down, it's just rendered incapable of continuing to deliver data, which then causes it to tear itself down. Trying to come up with some text, but anything better would be great: 
```suggestion
While idle, a QMux connection may also be disrupted by inactivity timers outside of QMux; e.g., a 
Network Address Translator {{?RFC7857}} that discards its mapping. QX_PING frames can be used to
```

elicit a peer response, which could keep inactivity timers at lower transport

> layers and intermediaries from causing premature connection termination.

Reviewer 4: Nicely said

datagrams when they cannot be promptly delivered to the application.

# Connection Termination

A QMux connection can be terminated by an idle timeout, by a CONNECTION_CLOSE
frame, or by observing a reset of the underlying transport.

## Idle Timeout

In QUIC version 1, the idle timer is reset whenever a packet is received and
processed successfully, including acknowledgment-only packets. It also raises
the idle timeout using PTO, a value derived from when acknowledgments are
received. QMux cannot adopt this approach as-is since acknowledgments are not
processed by QMux stacks; they are processed by the underlying transport
instead.

As a consequence, the idle timeout of QMux is defined as follows:

* As in QUIC version 1, endpoints negotiate an idle timeout using the
  max_idle_timeout transport parameter.
* As in QUIC version 1, endpoints reset the idle timer each time a QMux record
  is completely received.
* Endpoints also reset the idle timer each time a QMux record is completely
  sent. This is analogous to QUIC version 1 endpoints resetting the idle timer

>   when an acknowledgment-only packet is received. Since acknowledgments are not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  when a packet is received. Since acknowledgments are not
```

Author: Yeah, the analogy for received packets are split into two bullet points. If the received packet was not ack-only: it translates to QMux endpoints receiving a QMux record, which is covered by the bullet point right above. So this bullet point is specifically about taking the equivalent of receiving ack-only packets into consideration.

That said, I do not think we need this sentence, when the rationale is clear in sentence that follows and the paragraph above.

23ee5fe drops this sentence.

>   directly visible to QMux endpoints, QMux endpoints observe the side effect of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  directly visible to QMux endpoints, QMux does not reset the idle time on acknowledgements.
  Instead, endpoints only observe the side effect of
```

  acknowledgments: bytes drained from the send buffer, opening up space to send
  more.

> * Activity on the underlying transport, such as TCP keepalives, does not reset

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Activity on the underlying transport - such as acknowledgments, TCP keepalives, or TLS key updates - does not reset
```

  the idle timer.
* QMux endpoints do not increase their idle timeouts relative to the current
  Probe Timeout (PTO).

> When idle, a QMux connection may also be torn down by the underlying transport

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A QMux connection may also be torn down by the underlying transport
```

Author: We have the "Handling Resets" section that talks about disruptions within / to the underlying transport in general. This paragraph is specifically about using QX_PING to keep the connection alive while there is no data to be sent or received.

1d3b14f makes that clear by talking about "timers outside of QMux" (e.g., NAT) disrupting idle connections. PTAL.

Reviewer: I suggested this because it's redundant in the statement.  The transport can just tear down the connection, idle or not.  The extra condition implies that maybe that can't happen.  If you want to keep something about going idle, you could change the last sentence to:

> QX_PING frames can be used to
elicit a peer response, which could keep inactivity timers
at lower transport layers and intermediaries from
causing premature connection termination.

Author: Makes sense. Adopted the suggested text as aac4e40.

stack or by intermediaries (e.g., Network Address Translation {{?RFC7857}}),
independent of the negotiated timeout. QX_PING frames can be used to elicit a
peer response and keep both the QMux connection and the underlying transport
active.

## Initiating a Connection Close

When the idle timeout expires, an endpoint gracefully shuts down its sending

> side of the underlying transport, without sending any frames.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
side of the underlying transport. The endpoint does not send any QMux frames, though
it might send messages at lower layers, such as a TLS `close_notify` alert.
```

# Security Considerations

QMux inherits many of the security properties and considerations laid out in
{{Section 21 of QUIC}}. This section describes considerations specific to QMux.

## Forward Progress

Failure to follow the forward-progress requirements in
{{forward-progress-flow-control}} can lead to deadlock and can be exploited for
resource-exhaustion attacks.

## Denial of Service

As in QUIC ({{Section 21.9 of QUIC}}), valid QMux frames can be used to keep a
connection alive, to consume processing resources disproportionate to useful
progress, or to force an endpoint to generate responses. For example, sending
large numbers of small records, PADDING frames, tiny flow control increments, or
QX_PING frames can be used for such purposes. Implementations SHOULD monitor for
such traffic patterns and MAY treat suspicious activity as a connection error of
type PROTOCOL_VIOLATION.

Unlike QUIC, where each packet is a self-contained unit, QMux records can arrive
incrementally over the underlying byte stream. Implementations need to consider

> resources held for partially received records.

Reviewer: Partially received records can be processed...

Author: :+1: a747b24 changes the clause to "resources they might use to hold partially received records"

# Security Considerations

QMux inherits many of the security properties and considerations laid out in
{{Section 21 of QUIC}}. This section describes considerations specific to QMux.

## Forward Progress

Failure to follow the forward-progress requirements in
{{forward-progress-flow-control}} can lead to deadlock and can be exploited for
resource-exhaustion attacks.

## Denial of Service

As in QUIC ({{Section 21.9 of QUIC}}), valid QMux frames can be used to keep a
connection alive, to consume processing resources disproportionate to useful
progress, or to force an endpoint to generate responses. For example, sending
large numbers of small records, PADDING frames, tiny flow control increments, or
QX_PING frames can be used for such purposes. Implementations SHOULD monitor for
such traffic patterns and MAY treat suspicious activity as a connection error of
type PROTOCOL_VIOLATION.

Unlike QUIC, where each packet is a self-contained unit, QMux records can arrive
incrementally over the underlying byte stream. Implementations need to consider
resources they might use to hold partially received records.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Unlike QUIC, QMux does not provide protection against premature connection termination
by unauthenticated on-path entities.
An intermediary that can disrupt the underlying transport
will be able to successfully terminate connections; see {{handling-resets}}.

```

Author: Thanks, this is needed. Taken as c73558d.

# Security Considerations

QMux inherits many of the security properties and considerations laid out in
{{Section 21 of QUIC}}. This section describes considerations specific to QMux.

## Forward Progress

Failure to follow the forward-progress requirements in
{{forward-progress-flow-control}} can lead to deadlock and can be exploited for
resource-exhaustion attacks.

## Denial of Service

As in QUIC ({{Section 21.9 of QUIC}}), valid QMux frames can be used to keep a
connection alive, to consume processing resources disproportionate to useful
progress, or to force an endpoint to generate responses. For example, sending
large numbers of small records, PADDING frames, tiny flow control increments, or
QX_PING frames can be used for such purposes. Implementations SHOULD monitor for
such traffic patterns and MAY treat suspicious activity as a connection error of

> type PROTOCOL_VIOLATION.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
such traffic patterns and MAY treat suspicious activity as a connection error.
```

We don't have to spell that one out.  (Not a firm ask, but a suggestion.)
